PEP 701: Syntactic formalization of f-strings (#2907)
python/peps: pep-0701.rst

    SyntaxError: invalid syntax

#. A previously considered way around it would lead to escape sequences
   in executed code and is prohibited in f-strings::

    >>> f'Magic wand { bag[\'wand\'] } string'
    SyntaxError: f-string expression portion cannot include a backslash

#. Comments are forbidden even in multi-line f-strings::

    >>> f'''A complex trick: {
    ... bag['bag']  # recursive bags!
    ... }'''
    SyntaxError: f-string expression part cannot include '#'

#. Arbitrary nesting of expressions without expansion of escape sequences is
   available in every single other language employing a string interpolation
   method that uses expressions instead of just variable names, `per Wikipedia`_.

These limitations serve no purpose from a language user perspective and
can be lifted by giving f-literals a regular grammar without exceptions
and implementing it using dedicated parse code.

The other issue that f-strings have is that the current implementation in
CPython relies on tokenising f-strings as ``STRING`` tokens and a post processing of
these tokens. This has the following problems:

#. It adds a considerable maintenance cost to the CPython parser. This is because

>    the parsing code needs to be written by hand, which has historically lead to a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   the parsing code needs to be written by hand, which has historically led to a
```

   code by hand in C has always been considered error prone and dangerous as it needs
   to deal with a lot of manual memory management over the original lexer buffers.

#. The f-string parsing code is not able to use the new improved error message mechanisms
   that the new PEG parser, originally introduced in :pep:`617`, has allowed. The
   improvements that these error messages brought has been greatly celebrated but
   unfortunately f-strings cannot benefit from them because they are parsed in a
   separate piece of the parsing machinery. This is especially unfortunate, since
   there are several syntactical features of f-strings that can be confusing due
   to the different implicit tokenization that happens inside the expression
   part (for instance ``f"{y:=3}"`` is not an assignment expression).

#. Other Python implementations have no way to know if they have implemented
   f-strings correctly because contrary to other language features, they are not
   part of the :ref:`official Python grammar <f-strings>`.
   This is important because several prominent
   alternative implementations are using CPython's PEG parser, `such as PyPy`_,

>    and/or are basing their grammars on the official PEG Grammar. The

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   and/or are basing their grammars on the official PEG grammar. The
```

Reviewer 2: Caught the others but missed this one, thanks :+1:

   fact that f-strings use a separate parser prevents these alternative implementations
   from leveraging the official grammar and benefiting from improvements in error messages derived
   from the grammar.

A version of this proposal was originally `discussed on Python-Dev`_  and
`presented at the Python Language Summit 2022`_ where it was enthusiastically
received.

Rationale
=========

By building on top of the new Python PEG Parser (:pep:`617`), this PEP proposes
to redefine “f-strings”, especially emphasizing the clear separation of the
string component and the expression (or replacement, ``{...}``) component. :pep:`498`
summarizes the syntactical part of “f-strings” as the following:

    In Python source code, an f-string is a literal string, prefixed with ‘f’, which
    contains expressions inside braces. The expressions are replaced with their values.

> However unlike that definition, :pep:`498` also had formal list of exclusions on what

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, :pep:`498` also contained a formal list of exclusions on what
```

can or cannot be contained inside the expression component (primarily due to the
limitations of the existing parser). By clearly establishing the formal grammar, we
now also have the ability to define the expression component of an f-string as truly "any
applicable Python expression" (in that particular context) without being bound
by the limitations imposed by the details of our implementation.

The formalization effort and the premise above also has a significant benefit for
Python programmers due to its ability to simplify and eliminate the obscure
limitations. This reduces the mental burden and the cognitive complexity of
f-string literals (as well as the Python language in general).

#. The expression component can include any string literal that a normal Python expression
   can include. This opens up the possibility of nesting string literals (formatted or
   not) inside the expression component of an f-string with the same quote type (and length)::

>     >>> f"{"hello"}"

Reviewer: Personally I've encountered this most often when writing something like `f"these are the things: {", ".join(things)}"`. That might be a more compelling example. (But feel free to ignore this and keep the current examples.)

Author: Oh, I think this is a fantastic suggestion!

@isidentical @lysnikolaou Thoughts?

Reviewer 3: Indeed, that seems like a much real-worldy example!

Reviewer 4: Agreed for sure!

Reviewer 2: Made @JelleZijlstra 's comment into an applyable suggestion:

```suggestion
    >>> fTthese are the things: {", ".join(things)}"
```

   over the place, including a limit on the nesting depth of parentheses and
   brackets, a limit on the nesting of the blocks, a limit in the number of
   branches in ``if`` statements, a limit on the number of expressions in
   star-unpacking, etc.

Specification
=============

The formal proposed PEG grammar specification for f-strings is (see :pep:`617`
for details on the syntax):

.. code-block:: peg

    fstring
        | FSTRING_START fstring_middle* FSTRING_END
    fstring_middle
        | fstring_replacement_field
        | FSTRING_MIDDLE
    fstring_replacement_field
        | '{' (yield_expr | star_expressions) "="? [ "!" NAME ] [ ':' fstring_format_spec* ] '}'
    fstring_format_spec:
        | FSTRING_MIDDLE
        | fstring_replacement_field

This PEP leaves up to the implementation the level of f-string nesting allowed.
This means that limiting nesting is **not part of the language specification**
but also the language specification **doesn't mandate arbitrary nesting**. 

Three new tokens are introduced:

* ``FSTRING_START``: This token includes f-string character (``f``/``F``) and the open quote(s).

> * ``FSTRING_MIDDLE``: This token includes everything between two expression braces (``}`` and ``{``).

Reviewer: As well as the text between the opening quote and the first `{`. Would be good to mention this explicitly:
```suggestion
* ``FSTRING_MIDDLE``: This token includes the text between the opening quote
  and the first expression brace (``{``) and the text between two expression braces (``}`` and ``{``).
```
It was a little unexpected to me that the piece between the last brace and the closing quote is a different token, any reason for that?

Author: It simplifies the implementation of the lexer, at least in CPython, but indeed is a bit weird. Is also weird that the last quite is not included.

As an example::

    f'some words {a+b} more words {c+d} final words'

will be tokenized as::

    FSTRING_START - "f'"
    FSTRING_MIDDLE - 'some words '
    LBRACE - '{'
    NAME - 'a'
    PLUS - '+'
    NAME - 'b'
    RBRACE - '}'
    FSTRING_MIDDLE - ' more words '
    LBRACE - '{'
    NAME - 'c'
    PLUS - '+'
    NAME - 'd'
    RBRACE - '}'
    FSTRING_END - ' final words' (without the end quote)

while ``f"""some words"""`` will be tokenized simply as::

    FSTRING_START - 'f"""'
    FSTRING_END - 'some words'

All restrictions mentioned in the PEP are lifted from f-literals, as explained below:

* Expression portions may now contain strings delimited with the same kind of
  quote that is used to delimit the f-literal.
* Backslashes may now appear within expressions just like anywhere else in
  Python code. In case of strings nested within f-literals, escape sequences are
  expanded when the innermost string is evaluated.
* Comments, using the ``#`` character, are possible only in multi-line f-literals,
  since comments are terminated by the end of the line (which makes closing a
  single-line f-literal impossible)

Backwards Compatibility
=======================

> This PEP is not backwards incompatible: any valid Python code will continue to

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
This PEP is backwards compatible: any valid Python code will continue to
```

a slight suggestion, instead of the double negation, had to do a double take when first reading it.

Reviewer 2: Definitely agreed :+1:

    contains expressions inside braces. The expressions are replaced with their values.

However, :pep:`498` also contained a formal list of exclusions on what
can or cannot be contained inside the expression component (primarily due to the
limitations of the existing parser). By clearly establishing the formal grammar, we
now also have the ability to define the expression component of an f-string as truly "any
applicable Python expression" (in that particular context) without being bound
by the limitations imposed by the details of our implementation.

The formalization effort and the premise above also has a significant benefit for
Python programmers due to its ability to simplify and eliminate the obscure
limitations. This reduces the mental burden and the cognitive complexity of
f-string literals (as well as the Python language in general).

#. The expression component can include any string literal that a normal Python expression
   can include. This opens up the possibility of nesting string literals (formatted or
   not) inside the expression component of an f-string with the same quote type (and length)::

>     >>> f"Tthese are the things: {", ".join(things)}"

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
    >>> f"These are the things: {", ".join(things)}"
```

The formal proposed PEG grammar specification for f-strings is (see :pep:`617`
for details on the syntax):

.. code-block:: peg

    fstring
        | FSTRING_START fstring_middle* FSTRING_END
    fstring_middle
        | fstring_replacement_field
        | FSTRING_MIDDLE
    fstring_replacement_field
        | '{' (yield_expr | star_expressions) "="? [ "!" NAME ] [ ':' fstring_format_spec* ] '}'
    fstring_format_spec:
        | FSTRING_MIDDLE
        | fstring_replacement_field

This PEP leaves up to the implementation the level of f-string nesting allowed.
This means that limiting nesting is **not part of the language specification**
but also the language specification **doesn't mandate arbitrary nesting**. 

Three new tokens are introduced:

* ``FSTRING_START``: This token includes f-string character (``f``/``F``) and the open quote(s).
* ``FSTRING_MIDDLE``: This token includes the text between the opening quote
  and the first expression brace (``{``) and the text between two expression braces (``}`` and ``{``).
* ``FSTRING_END``: This token includes everything after the last expression brace (or the whole literal part
  if no expression exists) until the closing quote.

> These tokens are always string parts and they are semantically equivalent to the

Author: We probably want to rewrite this to mention that these token descriptions are only really an implementation detail for the interpreter and that is subjected to change.

Reviewer: If it's an implementation detail, should the tokens be in the PEP at all?

Author: Yes, what’s an implementation detail is what the tokens contain, but the tokens themselves are part of the grammar

Author: I know it sounds a bit hocus pocus. Hopefully it will be more clear when i rewrite that

Reviewer 3: @pablogsal should we merge this one as is, or await the rewrite? (I think we can proceed and do the next iterations on top of the repo itself to start early to discussions)

Author: Yeah let’s merge this and iterate in more PRs
